---
title: "A Geometric View of Data Complexity: Efficient Local Intrinsic Dimension Estimation with Diffusion Models"
collection: publications
permalink: /publication/2024-12-flipd
excerpt: 
date: 2024-12-10
authors: 'Hamidreza Kamkari, Brendan Leigh Ross, Rasa Hosseinzadeh, <b>Jesse C. Cresswell</b>, Gabriel Loaiza-Ganem'
note: "Spotlight. Top 10% of accepted papers"
venueshort: 'NeurIPS 2024'
venue: 'Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems'
paperurl: 'https://openreview.net/forum?id=nd8Q4a8aWl'
pdf: 'https://arxiv.org/pdf/2406.03537.pdf'
codeurl: 'https://github.com/layer6ai-labs/flipd'
videourl:
slidesurl:
citation: 'Hamidreza Kamkari, Brendan Leigh Ross, Rasa Hosseinzadeh, Jesse C. Cresswell, Gabriel Loaiza-Ganem. A Geometric View of Data Complexity: Efficient Local Intrinsic Dimension Estimation with Diffusion Models. In Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, volume 37, 2024'
---
High-dimensional data commonly lies on low-dimensional submanifolds, and estimating the local intrinsic dimension (LID) of a datum -- i.e. the dimension of the submanifold it belongs to -- is a longstanding problem. LID can be understood as the number of local factors of variation: the more factors of variation a datum has, the more complex it tends to be. Estimating this quantity has proven useful in contexts ranging from generalization in neural networks to detection of out-of-distribution data, adversarial examples, and AI-generated text. The recent successes of deep generative models present an opportunity to leverage them for LID estimation, but current methods based on generative models produce inaccurate estimates, require more than a single pre-trained model, are computationally intensive, or do not exploit the best available deep generative models, i.e. diffusion models (DMs). In this work, we show that the Fokker-Planck equation associated with a DM can provide a LID estimator which addresses all the aforementioned deficiencies. Our estimator, called FLIPD, is compatible with all popular DMs, and outperforms existing baselines on LID estimation benchmarks. We also apply FLIPD on natural images where the true LID is unknown. Compared to competing estimators, FLIPD exhibits a higher correlation with non-LID measures of complexity, better matches a qualitative assessment of complexity, and is the only estimator to remain tractable with high-resolution images at the scale of Stable Diffusion.