---
title: "Causal Foundation Models with Continuous Treatments"
collection: publications
permalink: /publication/2026-07-ccpfn
excerpt: 
date: 2026-07-10
authors: 'Christopher Stith, Medha Barath, Vahid Balazadeh, <b>Jesse C. Cresswell</b>, Rahul G. Krishnan'
note:
venueshort: 'ICML 2026 Workshop FMSD'
venue: 'ICML 2026 Workshop on Foundation Models for Structured Data'
paperurl: 'https://arxiv.org/abs/2605.15133'
pdf: 'https://arxiv.org/pdf/2605.15133'
codeurl:
videourl:
slidesurl:
citation: 'Christopher Stith, Medha Barath, Vahid Balazadeh, Jesse C. Cresswell, Rahul G. Krishnan. Causal Foundation Models with Continuous Treatments. ICML 2026 Workshop on Foundation Models for Structured Data'
---
Causal inference, estimating causal effects from observational data, is a fundamental tool in many disciplines. Of particular importance across a variety of domains is the continuous treatment setting, where the variable of intervention has a continuous range. This setting is far less explored and represents a substantial shift from the binary treatment setting, with models needing to represent effects across a continuum of treatment values. In this paper, we present the first causal foundation model for the continuous treatment setting. Our model meta-learns the ability to predict causal effects across a wide variety of unseen tasks without additional training or fine-tuning. First, we design a novel prior over data-generating processes with continuous treatment variables in order to generate a rich causal training corpus. We then train a transformer to reconstruct individual treatment-response curves given only observational data, leveraging in-context learning to amortize expensive Bayesian posterior inference. Our model achieves state-of-the-art performance on individual treatment-response curve reconstruction tasks compared to causal models which are trained specifically for those tasks.